Add ReleaseProcess.md (#4207)
input-output-hk/ouroboros-network: ouroboros-consensus/docs/ReleaseProcess.md

This document explains how the Consensus team uses Pull Requests (PRs), version numbers, and branches to prepare releases of our packages.

Let us assume our repository contains two packages FOO and BAR.
Two is enough to explain the complexities.
The resulting rules can be generalized to any number of packages, as explained at the end of the document.

*Remark*.
If you disagree with the decisions in this document, please consider reviewing our brainstorming notes and discussions, available at [this document's PR](https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-network/pull/4207).
Even if you choose not to do so, please share your concern with us.

## Notation

In this document, we will assume each version number is a MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH triple.
This is easy to generalize to other conventional notations, such as [the PVP](https://pvp.haskell.org/)'s MAJOR.MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH quadruples.

We refer throughout this document to _the main branch_ (aka `master`, aka `main`).

If you search for "RULE:" in this document, you'll find the key statements.

## Rules for Branches

The Consensus team will sometimes be maintaining multiple MAJOR.MINOR versions of the same package simultaneously.

> EG We might release FOO-2.4.1 on Monday, release FOO-2.3.7 on Wednesday, and release FOO-2.4.2 on Friday, etc.

Reviewer: I don't get how the example relates to releasing versions simultaneously, and why we choose that ordering. In particular, the fact that we released `FOO-2.4.1` indicates that we were maintaining a previous version `< 2.4.1`?

Author: I expanded that last sentence to the following. Does that clarify?

> EG If we were currently maintaining a 2.3 version and a 2.4 version simultaneously, then we might release FOO-2.4.1 on Monday, release FOO-2.3.7 on Wednesday, and release FOO-2.4.2 on Friday, etc.

Author: I pushed up a longer example. Does it suffice for this?

Reviewer: > I expanded that last sentence to the following. Does that clarify? 

It does! Thanks!

> - Whenever we're maintaining only the one greatest-ever MAJOR.MINOR version of a package, then all work on that package will happen on the main branch.

Reviewer: Something like this? 

```text
            FOO-2.3.6 --- FOO-2.3.7 <- release branch 
             /                                            
-------FOO-2.3.? ------  .... ------ FOO-2.4.1  
                                        ^
                                        |
                                   main branch
```

Assuming `FOO-2.4.1` is the greatest-ever version, if we have to maintain this version, then we develop on `main`. If we have to maintain `2.3.7`, then we work on the release branch.

Author: > If we have to maintain 2.3.7, then we work on the release branch.

If necessary, yes (see my reply to your other comment below). But hopefully that "work on the release branch" will just be cherry-picking some commits from the main branch.

Author: I pushed up a longer example. Does it suffice for this?

Reviewer: I guess you refer to [this](https://github.com/input-output-hk/ouroboros-network/pull/4207/commits/02482cf7fbabf1b6e4441dd6d730f36c121bb45e#diff-a3b11ca853f39e9e181a2ad2868b36c39f946100f19907a46e41607456b48cd9R148) right? That example is really helpful, I just want to confirm my assumption: at the end of the example we'll end up with this commit structure, right?

```
F   J
|   |
E   I 
|   | 
D   H  
|   | 
C   G
| /
B
|
A
```

- Whenever we're also maintaining some lesser MAJOR.MINOR versions of a package, then some work for that package will also be happening on the respective _release branches_.

A _release branch_ is a branch dedicated to the maintenance of some older release of a package.

> RULE: If we have released a package FOO-X.Y.Z, then the release-FOO-X.Y.x branch MUST exist and its first-parent history MUST include the commit released as FOO-X.Y.Z.

Reviewer 2: It was not entirely clear to me from reading up to this point why the branch is named release-FOO-X.Y.**x**, though it is explained later. May be good to mention here what **x** represents (I think just a literal `x` character?) or to refer to the later section where it is explained

Author: Thanks; yeah, you and Damian both pointed that out. I'll add some concrete examples making that clear.

> RULE: If we have released a package FOO-X.Y.Z, then the release-FOO-X.Y.x branch MUST exist and its first-parent history MUST include the commit released as FOO-X.Y.Z.

Reviewer: >  MUST include the commit released as FOO-X.Y.Z

What is "the commit released as FOO-X.Y.Z"?

Reviewer: Do you mean the release commit?

Author: Yes. I think "the commit released as FOO-X.Y.Z" is easer to read than "the FOO-X.Y.Z release commit".

Do you disagree?

Author: For now, for consistency, I've removed all occurrences of the noun phrase "release commit" (there were two).

We can reverse that if I'm outvoted :P

Reviewer: Alright, clear. Thanks!

There are two kinds of work on release branches.
Most of the time, that work is immitating some work that was done on the main branch.
EG we fixed a bug on the main branch and we're backporting that fix onto a release branch (hopefully it's a trivial cherry-pick).
Rarely, though, there will be fresh work done on a release branch.
EG Consider the following possible timeline.

- We release FOO-2.4.1 on Monday, and FOO-2.4.1 completely reworked some functionality.
- We then realize on Tuesday that there was a severe bug in the old functionality.
- We fix the bug by merging a PR that targets the FOO-2.3.x release branch (since the bug no longer exists on the main branch!)
- We release FOO-2.3.7 on Wednesday.

*Remark*.
Not every first-parent commit in the history of the release branch is a release commit.

> We will be merging multiple PRs into the release branch in order to prepare the next release from it, so some commits will just be the intermediates between two releases.

Reviewer: > We will be merging multiple PRs into the release branch in order to prepare the next release from it

by means of cherry-picking commits from `main`?

Author: The plan is for the commits to be cherry-picked, yeah. See _fresh_ versus _backport_ in the `Notation` section above.

> There are two kinds of work on release branches.
> Most of the time, that work is immitating some work that was done on the main branch.
EG we fixed a bug on the main branch and we're backporting that fix onto a release branch (hopefully it's a trivial cherry-pick).
> Rarely, though, there will be fresh work done on a release branch.

*Remark*.
The release branch for the greatest MAJOR.MINOR version of a package is somewhat degenerate.
It's either equal to or a prefix of the main branch.

> The only time it MUST be updated to the tip of the main branch is when we cut a release of the package from the main branch, to satisfy the rule above about all X.Y.Z release commits being on the release-X.Y.x branch.

Reviewer: It'd be nice to have an example of this.

Reviewer: Similar to the example above:

```text
            FOO-2.3.6 --- FOO-2.3.7 <- release branch 
             /                                            
-------FOO-2.3.? ------  .... ------ FOO-2.4.1 --- (what happens with the commits here?)  
                                        ^
                                        |
                                   main branch = release branch? 
```                                   

do we need to create a branch when we release `2.4.1`? If so, what happens to the commits on `main`?

Author: I pushed up a longer example. Does it suffice for this?

Reviewer: Yes.

## Rules for PRs

We classify each PR as either a _fresh_ PR or as a _backport_ PR.

- A fresh PR is doing work that has never been done before (new feature, new bugfix, etc).
  Except in the rare circumstances discussed in the previous section, every fresh PR will target the main branch.
- The primary objective of a backport PR is merely to immitate some fresh PR.

The rules are then as follows.

- RULE: A fresh PR MUST target the main branch, if possible.
- RULE: A PR MUST NOT be merged into a branch unless it should be included in the next release from that branch.
- We maintain a changelog for each package (one for FOO and one for BAR).
- RULE: A PR MUST add a pending changelog entry for each package that it alters.
- RULE: Each pending changelog entry MUST at the very least classify the alteration to that package as a _patch_ level change (eg a bugfix), a _minor_ change (eg a non-breaking interface change), or a _major_ change (eg a breaking interface change).

*Remark*.
Notice that we do not allow merging a PR that should not be included the subsequent release.

> This means some PR may be "done" but still should not be merged.

Reviewer: So according to this rule, if we are not sure we will be releasing a new feature, eg UTxO-HD, the feature has to live in a branch, right?

Author: Yes. Please confirm: that's what we decided on in our call, right?

Author: Hmm. If, _unlike UTxO HD_, we do have an easy way to "include the feature but definitely hidden behind a flag", then we could go ahead and merge that. But we'd only merge it if we are _intending_ for it to be in the next release: the "experimental flag" will be part of the next release. (That's the point of the flag.)

Reviewer: > Yes. Please confirm: that's what we decided on in our call, right?

I think so, but I'll ask the rest.

    - (Note that there's at least one package, since otherwise we wouldn't be mkaing a release.)
    - (Note that there must be some alterations to each package we are including in the release, since otherwise we wouldn't be including it in the release---but mind the _bundles_ mentioned below.)
    - Let X.Y.Z be the version of the package currently declared on this branch.
    - RULE: If any alteration was major-level, then we bump to (X+1).0.0.
    - RULE: Else if any alteration was minor-level, then we bump to X.(Y+1).0.
    - RULE: Otherwise all alterations were patch-level, so we bump to X.Y.(Z+1).
- RULE: We merge one final PR, which MUST do exactly the following and nothing more.
    - RULE: It updates the versions of the packages being released as described above.
    - RULE: It flushes the pending changelog entries of each package being released into the `CHANGELOG.md` file for that package.
- RULE: We tag that resulting merge commit as release-PKG-A.B.C; one tag per package PKG that is being released (ie FOO and/or BAR).

> - RULE: If C is 0, then we also create the release branch release-PKG-A.B.x from this new commit.

Reviewer: What is branch `release-PKG-A.B.x` for? And does `x` represent a particular value, or it's `x` verbatim?

Author: I've added a sub-bullet here with a concrete example. Does that clarify?

@jorisdral commented similarly about `.x`. This `.x` suffix is used in other IOG repos, eg:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1106131/213036306-b7145ab7-e99f-4658-a6c2-26f16ebc0858.png)

Reviewer: >> What is branch release-PKG-A.B.x for?
> I've added a sub-bullet here with a concrete example. Does that clarify?

Is this the clarification? 

> EG We insert these package's new versions into Hackage

So the answer, in the example, would be: we use this branch so that CHaP can pick the new version up?

Author: The clarification was about only about the `.x` question:

> For example, when releasing version 2.3.0 of a package named FOO, we'd create the branch named release-FOO-2.3.x.

The answer to "What is branch release-PKG-A.B.x for?" is explained earlier in the document ("## Rules for Branches") and it's demonstrated in action in the example at the bottom ("### Release Branch Example")

Reviewer: I see. Thanks.

- RULE: Finally, we announce this commit hash as the new release of these packages.
  EG We insert these package's new versions into Hackage, [CHaP](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-haskell-packages), etc.

*Remark*.

> To explicitly clarify: after a release of a package, there will be zero pending changelog entries for that package; they were destroyed when incorprated into the `CHANGELOG.md` file making the release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To explicitly clarify: after a release of a package, there will be zero pending changelog entries for that package; they were merged into the `CHANGELOG.md` file when making the release.
```

Author: I expanded this sentence to be much more explicit.

> But there may be pending changelog entries of other packages, those that we're included in this release.

Reviewer: Those that were not included?

Author: Yes, yeesh. A bad typo. Thanks.

## Notation

In this document, we will assume each version number is a MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH triple.
This is easy to generalize to other conventional notations, such as [the PVP](https://pvp.haskell.org/)'s MAJOR.MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH quadruples.

We refer throughout this document to _the main branch_ (aka `master`, aka `main`).

If you search for "RULE:" in this document, you'll find the key statements.

## Rules for Branches

The Consensus team will sometimes be maintaining multiple MAJOR.MINOR versions of the same package simultaneously.
EG If we were currently maintaining a 2.3 version and a 2.4 version simultaneously, then we might release FOO-2.4.1 on Monday, release FOO-2.3.7 on Wednesday, and release FOO-2.4.2 on Friday, etc.

- Whenever we're maintaining only the one greatest-ever MAJOR.MINOR version of a package, then all work on that package will happen on the main branch.
- Whenever we're also maintaining some lesser MAJOR.MINOR versions of a package, then some work for that package will also be happening on the respective _release branches_.

A _release branch_ is a branch dedicated to the maintenance of some older release of a package.

> RULE: If we have released a package FOO-X.Y.Z, then the release-FOO-X.Y.x branch MUST exist and its first-parent history MUST include the commit released as FOO-X.Y.Z.

Reviewer 3: I am not opposed, but what would be a use case for backporting some change to a *proper* subset of minor versions of a given major release? IIUC, our users should always be able to upgrade from one minor versions to a later one under the same major version. If this extra flexibility is not required, we could just have one branch per major version.

Author: Hmm. I hadn't thought that through---I merely mimicked what I've seen in the `cardano-node` and `cardano-ledger` repositories.

Please confirm I'm understanding your point correctly. It should be as simple for the user to upgrade from A.B.X to A.(B+1).Y as it would be for them to upgrade to A.B.(C+1). And therefore we shouldn't bother maintain release branches for each MAJOR.MINOR pair, only one per MAJOR. Is that right?

In the abstract, that does seem right to me, because of the backwards-compatibility semantics of minor version bumps. But I wonder if there's some surprise lurking there that I'm failing to anticipate. ... maybe the downstream user has other constraints (eg regulatory/large company bullshit SoPs/etc) preventing them from taking the minor bump upgrade?

We can cross that bridge when/if we come to it, though. I'll adjust the text now.

Reviewer 3: > Please confirm I'm understanding your point correctly. It should be as simple for the user to upgrade from A.B.X to A.(B+1).Y as it would be for them to upgrade to A.B.(X+1). And therefore we shouldn't bother maintaining release branches for each MAJOR.MINOR pair, only one per MAJOR. Is that right?

Exactly, thanks for spelling that out explicitly.

*Remark*.
The release branch for the greatest MAJOR.MINOR version of a package is somewhat degenerate.
It's either equal to or a prefix of the main branch.
The only time it MUST be updated to the tip of the main branch is when we cut a release of the package from the main branch, to satisfy the rule above about all commits that were released as some version X.Y.Z being on the release-X.Y.x branch.

## Rules for PRs

We classify each PR as either a _fresh_ PR or as a _backport_ PR.

- A fresh PR is doing work that has never been done before (new feature, new bugfix, etc).
  Except in the rare circumstances discussed in the previous section, every fresh PR will target the main branch.
- The primary objective of a backport PR is merely to immitate some fresh PR.

The rules are then as follows.

- RULE: A fresh PR MUST target the main branch, if possible.
- RULE: A PR MUST NOT be merged into a branch unless it should be included in the next release from that branch.
- We maintain a changelog for each package (one for FOO and one for BAR).
- RULE: A PR MUST add a pending changelog entry for each package that it alters.

> - RULE: Each pending changelog entry MUST at the very least classify the alteration to that package as a _patch_ level change (eg a bugfix), a _minor_ change (eg a non-breaking interface change), or a _major_ change (eg a breaking interface change).

Reviewer 3: Do we want to add a RULE that merge bot such as [Mergify](https://docs.mergify.com/actions/backport/#backport-action) must be used if possible (i.e. no conflicts)?

Author: This document is only about which branches&versions should exist and how they should relate. How you actually merge the PRs seems beyond the scope of that. What do you think?
